+++
title = "Passion vs. Profit: My Quest for Meaningful Craftsmanship in Tech"
description = "In a world where money often takes the front seat, how do we balance the joy of craftsmanship with the need for financial stability? Here's a personal reflection on the intersection of passion, craft, and monetary pursuits."
tags = ["Personal Reflection", "Technology", "Entrepreneurship", "Software development"]
published_at = "2023-09-13T12:00:00+00:00"
+++

As I delve deeper into my work on [Glossia](https://github.com/glossia) and [Tuist Cloud](https://github.com/tuist/tuist), I frequently find myself drawn to tasks that, while they influence the final product, aren't necessarily seen as financial priorities by many. This leaves me in a conundrum: *I can pursue what I genuinely enjoy but might not be financially rewarding, or I can focus on monetary gains and potentially lose out on the joy of the process.* Striking the right balance is an ongoing challenge. It begs the question - what kind of world are we molding if human needs take a backseat?

Strangely enough, **pursuing money doesn't fulfill me.** I recently attended an AI Meetup in Berlin, and left feeling hollow. The majority of conversations revolved around financial pursuits - raising capital, monetizing ideas, or selling startups. Shockingly, there was little to no discussion about the human-centric problems the showcased technology aimed to solve.

Ideally, **I'd like a steady stream of income that lets me forget about financial woes altogether.** But attaining this requires adopting a business-centric mindset which doesn't resonate with me. Wouldn't it be wonderful if financial stability was the byproduct of quality craftsmanship? This was evident with Tuist. A simple change on the website, showcasing logos of companies using our platform, suddenly piqued the interest of many. Ironically, this value was constructed without a monetary focus. Isn't that paradoxical?

A recent endeavor of mine is [Noora](https://github.com/glossia/noora), a design system for Glossia, powered by Elixir and inspired by prominent JavaScript design systems. I recognized the superior design systems in JavaScript and felt it unjust for users to integrate additional complexity into their stack merely to access these systems. With Glossia in mind, I opted to embed this into its core and make it universally accessible. This also gave me a chance to delve deeper into [Elixir macros](https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/meta/macros.html). While such endeavors may not directly boost Glossia's profitability, they refine the craftsmanship, enhance the product, and nurture a community - potentially drawing Elixir enthusiasts towards Glossia. A parallel can be drawn with [Shopify](https://shopify.com) and its significant contributions to the [Ruby community](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/), now a haven for Ruby developers.

Reflecting on this, **I believe such an approach is what sets Tuist apart.** It's a project that oozes humanity and is primarily fueled by passion. Introducing a financial element is a necessity, a means to an end. My earnest hope is that once I reach that financial comfort zone, I can continue to revel in the sheer joy of craftsmanship. I wonder if others resonate with these sentiments? I'd be keen to hear your perspectives.
